From:
https://www.artsy.net/article/ruse-laboratories-gerald-jay-sussman-creator-of-scheme

In January 1978 many members of the MIT Electrical Engineering &
Computer Sciences (EECS) department attended a class taught by Charles
Botchek on the physical electronics of Very-large-scale integration
(VLSI) technology.  I was one of those faculty members.  It was pretty
exciting, because we felt that we could influence the way that
discipline was evolving.  The class ended on 6 February 1978--the day
of the famous Blizzard of '78-- so many of us were stuck at MIT for a
while.

We had heard that Lynn Conway from Xerox and Carver Mead from Caltech
were making real progress on making it possible for people who were
not at a chip-fab facility to specify chips for experimental
designs. In the Spring of '78 we invited Lynn Conway to teach the
class on VLSI design that she was working on with Carver Mead.  Just a
few years earlier Guy L. Steele Jr., (then my graduate student) and I
invented a simplified but elegant version of the LISP family of
languages that we called Scheme.  Guy and I wrote a number of internal
memos (Lambda the Ultimate...) that later became famous.  Guy enrolled
in Lynn's class. For his term project he designed and fabricated a
direct interpreter for Scheme, called Scheme-78.  It didn't quite work
(because of three missing wires); it didn't have a garbage collector;
and it was too small to do anything impressive; but it encouraged us
to try again. Over the next few months Guy Steele, Jack Holloway, and
I designed a new interpreter that we thought could actually be run on
a real memory and tested with real programs.  I designed the register
array, Guy and I developed the microcode.  Jack made a PLA generator
that could hold the microcode, and we roped Alan Bell of Xerox PARC
into assembling the Scheme-79 Chip.  We pulled this off in a few
man-months of time and it worked!  Scheme-79 had a mark-sweep garbage
collector with a Deutsch-Schorr-Waite mark algorithm and a two-finger
compacting sweep. It also had a two-level microcode: The main PLA
contained rather high-level microcode instructions that were further
elaborated by a nanocode PLA that operated the register array.

Further encouraged, I started a new project to make a chip that was
actually big enough and fast enough to be useful to run real research
programs.  This was the Scheme-81 chip.  It was a 32-bit machine, with
6 bits of type code and 26 bits of address.  It had microcode support
for everything required to make a Scheme computer operating system,
including a stop-and-copy garbage collector, a coprocessor bus, and an
interrupt system. For Scheme-81 the microcode was written by Richard
Stallman, Chris Hanson, and me.  (Steele had graduated and moved on to
CMU as faculty.)

Howie Shrobe (my former student) and I led a pretty big effort to
apply artificial intelligence technology to the computer-aided design
of integrated circuits.  Students involved were Neil Mayle, John
Batali, Ned Goodhue, and Jon Taft.  We developed LISPIC, a Lisp-based
integrated-circuit design system that supported the design of
Scheme-81.  I worked with Shrobe, Mayle, and Batali to build a
Design-Procedure Language for describing the layout of chips in terms
of high-level abstractions.  Batali wrote an elegant PLA generator;
Shrobe wrote a data-path generator, and the Daedalus graphics-editing
system for the MIT Lisp Machines, which we used for this
project. Goodhue worked with me on the initial interpretation of the
microcode, and he ported Clark Baker's design-rule checker to the
LISPIC system. Mayle and Taft designed and built the boards that
plugged into the Lisp Machine for testing the chips.  Batali did the
final layout, routing, and assembly of the Scheme-81 chip using the
LISPIC software.

The only run of Scheme-81 chips produced chips that worked, but
unreliably, due to an over-long diffusion wire (that was my
fault!). We got it to work by carefully adjusting the substrate bias,
and it worked long enough to run the doubly-recursive fibonacci
program at amazing speeds.  Phil Agre designed and built an ASSQ
coprocessor chip to sit on the Scheme-81 bus and provide high-speed
access to linear tables and lists.  It was apparent that with another
run and a few tiny edits we could have high-performance Scheme
machines.  But at this point we ran out of energy, so we declared a
success and stopped building more of these chips.

Overall, this was a fun set of projects for the time (from 1978 to
1982).  However, it diverted me and many of my friends from doing some
more fundamental AI work that we really wanted to do.
